
11. The Starter Motor is Failing
The starter motor is the component that turns the engine over when you start the car. If it fails it is either a result of electrical solenoid damage, the motor itself has broken or there are other faults in the electrical system. It is difficult to assess when a starter motor is likely to break and to avoid replacing it unnecessarily it is best to get the car inspected by a professional to determine the cause of the starting issues before doing so.

12. There are Cracks in the Windscreen
Usually it takes some kind of external force like a stone to crack a windscreen but there are some cars that are prone to damage because of factory production vulnerabilities. Although a small crack might not seem like a big deal, they can spread rapidly and compromise the integrity of the glass.

13. The Car Gives Out Excessive Emissions
The emission system is designed to keep pollution to a minimum while making sure your car runs properly. The system includes a lot of sensitive equipment that can fail from time to time and these cause a variety of different problems in the car. For example, an O2 sensor that is faulty may start affecting the fuel mixture, leading to inefficiencies in the running and economy of the vehicle.

14. There are Fuel Leaks Through Evaporation
Fuel is sensitive to temperature and when it is hot the fuel will expand. This means that there has to be some way of venting the fumes. Since the fumes are toxic modern cars are fitted with equipment to stop that toxicity reaching the outside. The main problems you get with this is leaking through evaporation. Most problems happen with the fuel cap and it is easy and cheap to replace these regularly. However, if you see a warning light never ignore it – if you end up with a failure in the catalytic converter the repairs could be costly.

15. The Sensors Are Malfunctioning
Most modern cars come with a vast number of sensors but these can have issues in and of themselves. One of the most common faults are with the fuel-air sensors and these are costly to replace, often in excess of £200.

Car Problems

16. There are Gear Box Problems/Transmission Failures
The gearbox means that all of the power your car engine generates can be turned into the sort of rotational force that can be used by the wheels. Over time the gears will start to wear down and you will find that it becomes more difficult to change gears. Eventually the gear box will fail, leading to a repair bill that could potentially reach thousands of pounds.

16a. The Transmission Fluid is Leaking
Any transmission system needs fluid to make sure all of the working components are kept well lubricated. In automatic cars the fluid used in transmission is also used in the hydraulic and coolant systems. Small holes can form throughout the system which allow tiny amounts of fluid to leak. Over time, or if the leaks are severe, you will find that transmission is less efficient, plus you may find that the system overheats or loses pressure. In both cases the transmission will fail. If you see a red puddle collecting under your car it can be a sign that the transmission pan is cracked.

16b. The Automatic Transmission is Slipping
Automatic transmission can be long-lasting and efficient if well-maintained. It is not unreasonable for it to last over 200,000 miles. If you start to find the transmission is less smooth or slips it could be that there is damage or clogging in the seals, gaskets and lines inside the system. The transmission should be serviced regularly to avoid this.

16c. The Transmission Filters are Clogged
Just like any other fluid, transmission fluid will pick up all sorts of particles over time and many of these end up in the filter which then become clogged and need replacing. However, the transmission system is closed meaning that if you are getting issues with clogging and blockages it is likely to be down to some serious problems that could be beyond repair.

16d. There’s Water in the Transmission System
Water and other liquids can enter the transmission system and if it does it always means bad news for the car owner. In even small amounts water will damage the components in the system and lead to transmission failure.

17. Electrical Problems: Speakers
Most new cars come with extensive electrical systems meaning that problems can occur in multiple areas. One of the most immediately noticeable, and some would say annoying, faults is when the speakers fail. Sometimes this is as simple as a wire working loose and is easily fixed by removing the speaker and reattaching the faulty wire.

18. Electrical Problems: Lights
Lighting is always a safety issue especially if it is a headlight, brake light or indicator that is gone. Corrosion and wiring can cause bulb issues but most bulbs last a long time before falling foul of normal wear and tear.

19. Electrical Problems: Flat Battery
Flat batteries are inconvenient – and can also be a major source of stress. It could be that you have left a light on accidentally or something minor that can be simply sorted out by jump-starting the car. A flat battery can occur because the battery is old and has lost the ability to keep a charge. A battery older than 3-6 years or one that has travelled over 50,000 is due for replacement. Other causes include alternator failure of problems within the charging system.

Car Problems

20. There are a Few Minor Issues:
Scratches, Streaking Wipers and Poor Paintwork: These things are often annoying but don’t need immediate attention. Fixing them is also cheap and easy: Some cleaner wax and paint to cover scratches, new windscreen wipers cost just a few pounds and paint defects are nearly always cosmetic. If you do see any small rust spots, make sure you deal with these so they don’t turn into a bigger problem later on.

21. Window Problems
Most new cars have electric windows and one of the major bug-bears of car owners is when they stop winding all the way up. It isn’t just annoying either – a gap can mean water can enter the car interior and damage it, or you could become more a target for thieves.

22. Faulty Starter
If it’s hard to start your car you may be starting to hear a click before the car starts – if this is the case it could be time to replace your starter motor. If it goes the car will no longer start so it needs fixing sooner rather than later.

23. Rust
It can come as a shock to find rust on your car though it doesn’t always represent a serious issue it depends on where the rust is found. Rust on the body work is cosmetic but rust underneath the car or on your exhaust could be potentially dangerous and should be investigated as it could eat away at essential components.

Rust needs an anode, cathode and an electrolyte to form which makes cars prone to it. If the climate is humid enough your car can develop rust even if it’s under cover. The metal in your car can act as the anode and cathode and water is an electrolyte. A quick check around your vehicle, under the wheel arches and around the exhaust on a regular basis is often enough to spot any rust issue but every few months, especially if you live in a damp or humid environment, it would be a good idea to get on your hands and knees and check under your vehicle thoroughly.

24. My Fuel Economy is Falling
If the engine runs efficiently it will burn fuel at a better rate but if parts of the systems start to wear out and are not replaced you will find the mileage will drop. Keeping on top of things like your fuel and air filters, O2 and mass air sensors, with a proactive servicing regime will keep you car running efficiently. The bottom line is that fuel economy depends on how well your maintain the engine. Making sure that the vehicle is regularly serviced, with appropriate oil changes, filter changes and new spark plugs can make all the difference when it comes to mileage.

25. The Car Keeps Overheating
Surprisingly, overheating doesn’t happen that often especially in modern cars with their complex systems, sensors and so on acting to keep the vehicle’s temperature just right. Making sure the radiator is looked after and the water pump is working are the easiest and cheapest ways to prevent problems with overheating.

Whatever car you own it will require regular maintenance and even then you will still get things that go wrong from time to time. Some car models are more prone to certain issues than others and driving style can also have some impact on wair and efficiency. No matter what your vehicle, we hope that you have found this list helpful. Staying vigilant for signs of trouble and dealing with them when they occur saves time and money and keeps you on the road.





Problem #1: Dead Starter
Dead Starter
A dead starter means your car won’t be able to start. It’s usually one of two things: your starter has failed, or your battery is dead. You turn the key in the ignition, and it just doesn’t start – all you hear is a click. Starters have a solenoid in the column, or the starter relay, it allows an electric current to go from the starter motor in response to small control current, setting the engine in motion.

Prevention tips:  Whenever possible, do periodic checks on the main components of your starter motor[1] to see if anything needs fixing or replacing. A dead starter can easily issue with the spark plug, or that the starter relay requires some adjustment.

Problem #2: Dead Battery
Dead Battery
This is another reason why your car might not be starting. A dead battery happens when something drains the power out of it, or if your car battery is old. Car batteries are normally made to last no more than a few years, usually between three to five years.

Prevention tips:  In some instances, it’s all a matter of faulty connectors, in which case, just hook them back up and you should be good to go. The best way to prevent being surprised by a dead battery is to mark it with the date you purchased it[2] and get a new one before it expires.

Problem #3: Alternator Problems
Alternator Problems
The alternator keeps your battery in check and keeps it charged. If you have problems with your alternator[3], your car won’t be able to start or break down in the middle of the road. Signs of a failing alternator includes constant battery problem, unusual rattling from the engine, and electrical failure.

Prevention tips:  Age might be one reason why your alternator is giving you problems, so keep track of how old is your alternator and have it replaced if it’s been in service for years. The signs above are what you need to look out for should you need to replace your alternator.

Problem #4: Spark Plugs
Spark Plugs
Spark plugs have a shelf life. Wear and tear will eventually lead to these failing, and at certain inopportune moments. A failed spark plug[4] can cause your car to run at lower speeds and consume more fuel in the process.

Prevention tips:  Tune-ups every six months and spark plug replacements every five to ten months, or as they wear down, whichever comes first will go a long way to preventing long-term damage to the electronics in your car.

Problem #5: Radiator Leaks
Radiator Leaks
If your air conditioning starts failing[5], and your car is leaving a trail of coolant on the street and driveway, then you have a radiator leak. A faulty radiator can mean that your engine will overheat and leave you stranded at the worst possible time.

Prevention tips:  Just check all the connectors of your car to make sure that they’re in place. Replace immediately if there’s damage. Work out a coolant maintenance schedule by regularly flushing out coolant and replacing it.

Read More: 

Car Maintenance Checklist to Curb the Summer Heat
The Consequences of Not Getting Car Insurance
Problem #6: Oil Leaks
oil leak
A tell-tale sign that your oil is leaking would be dark stains on your driveway[6]</sup? and parking slot. It starts off small, but then it gets uncontrollable. Your oil filter might not be working well, or a plug is missing or misaligned.

Prevention tips:  Oil leaks are easily remedied if you maintain or tune-up your car regularly, and change your oil filter at regular intervals. To check for oil leaks, wash the engine bay. You can also find out if any other fluids are leaking from your car this way.

Problem #7: Flat Tires
flat tire
Flat tires happen when sharp objects puncture your tire, or your tires are tired from all the wear and tear[7] of being driven over various terrains. They can also happen when tires lose air pressure due to continued use.

Prevention tips:  To prevent flat tires, careful driving is always an idea. You also have to regularly check your tire’s air pressure, so it’s not over- or under-inflated, which can cause too much friction on your tires and rip its treads.

Final Thoughts